# Cassava-Leaf-Disease-Classification

This is the research code which I used for my research paper - Identification of Diseases in Cassava Leaves using Convolutional Neural Network for which I got the best research paper award in the 5th International Conference On Computational Intelligence And Communication Technology - CCICT 2022

I created an Artificial Intelligence powered Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model to tackle the problems faced by farmers during the cultivation of Cassava Plants and to automate the detection of diseases in plant leaves. My CNN model was able to identify the disease present in the plants by looking at its leaf images.

Automating the detection of different types of diseases in plants is one of the most complex recent challenges faced by agricultural experts all over the world. Cassava is loaded with carbohydrates and is mostly cultivated by small farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa as a security crop as it is capable of growing amidst drought which affects mostly all the other crops directly and adversely. At present, farmers are completely dependent on plant health experts to come and have a weekly or bi-weekly random inspection of the plants. They collect leaf samples from 3 different parts of the plant – top, middle, and lower parts and send them to the lab for testing. This takes up a lot of time and does not leave enough time for farmers to find a solution once the plants get affected. Therefore, it is important for farmers to detect the diseases as early as possible. To tackle this problem, we propose a disease detection model for cassava plants using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The features in the cassava plant images which signify the presence of disease will be automatically learned by the Neural Network. The farmers cannot detect these features manually. This research was conducted using a dataset of 21,397 labeled images collected during a regular survey in Uganda comprising four diseases namely Cassava Bacterial Blight (CBB), Cassava Brown Streak Disease (CBSD), Cassava Green Mottle (CGM), Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) and the dataset also contains healthy images of the plant. Most of the images in this dataset were taken by farmers in their gardens to provide a realistic representation of how farmers would diagnose these diseases in real life. These images were annotated by experts at the National Crops Resources Research Institute (NaCRRI) in collaboration with the AI lab at Makerere University, Kampala.

There are several diseases that affect Cassava and disrupt its production and growth. We have included the four most common diseases in our research which affect Cassava plants - Cassava Bacterial Blight (CBB), Cassava Brown Streak Disease (CBSD), Cassava Green Mottle (CGM), and Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD). CBB is the only bacterial disease among these, the rest of the diseases i.e., CBSD, CGM, and CMD are viral diseases and are the primary reason for the complete lack of yield. Among these, CMD is the direst and is found extensively worldwide [4]. The name of the disease is based on the disease’s most common symptom i.e., a mosaic look of the plant leaves. Other common symptoms include stunted growth, distortion of leaves, and S-shaped leaves [5]. Manual identification of these diseases is time taking, economically not feasible for the farmers, and requires the guidance and experience of agricultural experts. It is pragmatically not possible to think of analyzing the whole cassava field plant manually and keep records of the status of each and every plant at regular time intervals. Hence, automating the detection of these diseases in Cassava plants is essential. This paper aims to attenuate a tremendous loss of yield with the help of the model that we propose in this research. We propose a Cassava Disease Classification Model using Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), a Deep Neural Network class under Deep Learning. Primarily we train our Neural Network model on the training image directory and validate the model performance on the validation image directory simultaneously to monitor the generalization ability of the model. However, to make sure that the model performs efficiently in the real world, we evaluate the model performance using the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and Area Under the ROC curve (AUC) metrics on predictions predicted by our model on the test image directory. This research proposes a way to tackle the problem of detection of diseases in Cassava plants which the help of CNN.
